---
layout: post
title: A little about p-adics
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---
This is a short summary of what I recently learned about p-adics. Throughout this piece, $p$ is a prime.


Representing a number as a sequence of remainders 
-------------------------------------------------
Say you wish to find a solution to the equation $x^2 + 1 = 0$ in $\Bbb Z$. (Of course, there aren't any, but just bear with me.)

It often happens that considering equations modulo some number (not necessarily a prime) tells us a lot about them. This happens because of the following fact: if an equation has integer solutions, these solutions will also be valid if we consider both sides mod any number, so if the equation has no solutions modulo a certain number $n$ (i.e. in $\Bbb Z/n\Bbb Z$), it has no solutions in $\Bbb Z$.

For instance, the following is an easy exercise (hint: consider both sides $\text{mod } 4$).

**Exercise**. Show that $x^2 + y^2 = 435$ has no solutions for integer $x$ and $y$. 

Now, as we consider things modulo bigger and bigger numbers, we sort of "widen" the range of numbers we're looking at. This inspires the following construction: instead of considering numbers modulo a fixed prime, we can look at their remainders mod *every* power of the prime. So, for instance, $25978$ is $1, 4, 4, 58, 220, 463, 1921, 6295, 6295$ modulo $3, 3^2, \dots 3^9$. After that, the powers of $3$ are greater than $25978$, so the remainders are just $25978$ itself, and the series "bottoms out". It is easy to see that this must be the case for every finite integer.

This suggests that we represent an integer $n$ by a sequence of numbers\\[(a_0, a_1, a_2, a_3, \cdots)\\]where $a_k$ is the remainder of $n$ modulo $p^{k+1}$. (Equivalently, $a_{i+1} \bmod p^i = a_i$.) For instance, 25978 can be represented by the infinite tuple $(1, 4, 4, 58, \cdots)$ and so on. 
 
**Exercise**. Check the "equivalently" bit.

(A little work shows that $2$ is a solution to $x^2 + 1 = 0$ in $\Bbb Z/5\Bbb Z$. Passing to $\Bbb Z/25\Bbb Z$, we see that $7$ is a solution in this ring. Continuing this, we can say that the infinite sequence $(2, 7, 57, 182, \cdots)$ is a "solution" to $x^2+1=0$ "in the 5-adics".)

Introducing $\Bbb Z_p$
---------------------

However, what if the remainders didn't bottom out? What if there were *something* -- obviously not an integer, as we've seen -- that kept on giving different remainders modulo higher and higher powers of a prime? In much the same way as before, such an object can easily be represented as\\[(a_0, a_1, a_2, a_3, \cdots)\\] that is, an infinite sequence of remainders, with the relation\\[a_{i+1}\bmod p^i = a_i\\]

This kind of thing is called a p-adic integer. (Of course, technically, so are garden variety integers, but don't nitpick.) 

If you're [fancy](http://chat.stackexchange.com/transcript/message/22547205#22547205), you can now define the *ring of p-adics* as follows:
\\[\Bbb Z_p = \\{(a_0, a_1, a_2, \cdots) \in \prod \Bbb Z/p^k\Bbb Z : a_{i+1} \mod p^{i} = a_i\\}\\]

**Exercise**. Check that termwise addition and multiplication make $\Bbb Z_p$ into a [(commutative) ring](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commutative_ring).

Next, we arrive at $\Bbb Z_p$ from the *analytical* point of view.

A few definitions
-----------------

Quickly, a *metric space* is a set $A$ together with a *metric* $d:A\times A\to\Bbb R$, such that:

1. $d(x,y) = 0 \iff x = y$
2. $d(x,y) = d(y,x)$
3. $d(x,z) \leq d(x,y)+d(y,z)$

where you are to sprinkle $\forall$s to taste. The commonest examples include $\Bbb R^n$, $\Bbb{Z}$, $\Bbb Q$, $\Bbb C$ (where the metrics are the obvious ones) and even the set of continuous functions\\[\mathscr{C}([0,1], \Bbb R) = \\{f: [0,1]\to\Bbb R : f\, \text{is continuous}\\}\\]
where the metric is \\[d(f,g) = \sup_{x\in[0,1]} |f(x)-g(x)|\\]

**Exercise**. [Prove](http://chat.stackexchange.com/transcript/message/22543289#22543289) that $\mathscr{C}([0,1], \Bbb R)$ is a metric space.

Define \\[p^n \|\| x\\] for $p$ a prime if $p^n$ is the highest power of $p$ dividing $x$.

We define the symbol \\[v_p(x) = n\\] where $p^n \|\| x$. This is called a *p-adic valuation*.

The p-adic metric
-----------------

Now define $d_p:\Bbb {Z\times Z}\to\Bbb R$ by \\[d_p(x,y) = p^{-v_p(x-y)}\\] which essentially says that two numbers are 'close' in some sense if their difference is divisible by a large power of $p$.

**Notational convention**. We write $\|x,y\|_p$ instead of $d_p(x,y)$.

It is an interesting fact that this distance function, called the *p-adic metric*, is a valid metric on $\Bbb Z$.

**Exercise**. Prove that $\|\bullet,\bullet\|_p$ is a metric. 

Like every metric, the p-adic metric confers a topology -- in this case, on $\Bbb Z$. The completion of $\Bbb Z$ with respect to this metric is -- you guessed it -- $\Bbb Z_p$. What's more interesting, however, is this: $\Bbb Z_p$ is the [*completion*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Completion_%28algebra%29) of $\Bbb Z$ with respect to the p-adic metric.

Fascinating fact I can't prove yet #443: $\Bbb Z_p$ is compact
----
It turns out that $\Bbb Z_p$ can be given a topology. Since $\Bbb Z_p \subset \prod \Bbb Z/p^k\Bbb Z$, you can give the $\Bbb Z/p^k\Bbb Z$s the discrete topology, and give the product the product topology, and finally give $\Bbb Z_p$ the subspace topology. 

Apparently, this space is [**compact**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compact_space), by something called Tychonoff's theorem. 

Conclusion
---------
That's mostly it. I'll leave it to you to ruminate over these things. I don't know nearly enough to be able to say anything intelligent about $\Bbb Z_p$ yet, so I'm just writing down whatever I know to ensure that I know that much correctly. Please tell me if I've made any mistakes.

Thanks to the awesome [@BalarkaSen](http://math.stackexchange.com/users/117002/balarka-sen) and [@anon](http://math.stackexchange.com/users/11763/anon) over at MSE for teaching me. It's hard, considering I don't even know squat about rings. (I've used that word a bunch of times in this post, but that doesn't count.)

This stuff is fascinating -- apparently it's useful in advanced number theory. I can't wait to learn more! 
